Tinker: DocuBot
ℹ️ Activity Overview
⏰ ~45 minutes

You've joined a development team that owns a growing software project with scattered, sometimes inconsistent documentation. The team dreams of having a small assistant that can answer questions like:

"Where is the authentication token generated?"
"Which endpoint returns all users?"
"How do I connect to the database?"
Right now, a general purpose AI model has no idea what's inside your project's documentation folder, and it will happily guess if you let it. Your job is to build DocuBot, a lightweight retrieval-augmented assistant that can read your local docs, find relevant information, and generate grounded, reliable answers.

In this activity, you will explore three versions of the same system:

Naive Generation
The LLM tries to answer questions using the entire documentation set at once, often producing fluent but unreliable responses.

Retrieval Only
A simple search and ranking system you implement yourself, with no LLM involvement.

Full RAG (Retrieval + Generation)
DocuBot retrieves the most relevant snippets first, then asks the LLM to answer using only those snippets, reducing hallucinations and improving accuracy.

By comparing these modes side-by-side, you'll see why retrieval matters and how it strengthens the reliability of AI systems operating on private or unfamiliar content.

🎯 Goals
By completing this activity, you will be able to…

Explain the difference between naive generation, retrieval only, and RAG
Implement a simple document index and retrieval pipeline
Use retrieved snippets to ground LLM answers
Add guardrails such as "I do not know" refusals when information is missing
Evaluate DocuBot's behavior using realistic developer questions
✏️ Tinker Instructions
Part 1: Exploring the Knowledge Gap (Naive Generation)
⏰ ~10 mins

In this phase, you'll configure LLM access, explore the DocuBot codebase, and observe how a naive AI system behaves when it lacks retrieval or guardrails. Your focus is not speed, but judgment.


Go to the DocuBot Starter Repo and fork it into your GitHub account.


Clone your fork locally and open the folder in VS Code.


Install dependencies:

pip install -r requirements.txt

In the project root, open .env.example. This file shows the one environment variable DocuBot needs:

GEMINI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here

Rename the .env.example file to .env.


Visit the Gemini API key page (https://aistudio.google.com/app/api-keys) and create your own key. Copy the key into your .env file. The starter code will load this automatically using python-dotenv.


To confirm your key is being read correctly, run:

python main.py
If the key loads, you should see no warnings. If the key is missing, the program will let you know that LLM features are disabled.


Open the docs/ folder and skim the files. You don't need to understand every detail. Your goal is to build a rough mental model of what kinds of questions can be answered and what information is clearly not present.


Open docubot.py and main.py. Use Copilot to select any code that feels unfamiliar or unclear. Decide whether you are trying to understand, plan, or change something, and use Copilot accordingly.


Run DocuBot in Naive LLM Mode (Mode 1). Ask a few questions drawn from the docs folder:

"Where is the auth token generated?"
"Which endpoint returns all users?"
"How do I connect to the database?"

Compare the answers to what you saw in the docs. Notice when the model sounds confident but vague, when it blends information from multiple files, and when it answers questions that the docs don't clearly support.

Treat these answers as hypotheses, not facts. At this stage, fluent output is a signal to investigate, not to trust.
📍 Checkpoint: You have configured LLM access, used Copilot to reason about an unfamiliar codebase, and observed the limits of naive generation. You are ready to design a retrieval system that gives the model evidence instead of guesswork.
Part 2: Designing and Implementing Retrieval
⏰ ~10 mins

DocuBot can't answer questions reliably until it knows how to search your documentation. In this phase, you'll implement a simple retrieval system: an index that tracks where words appear, a scoring method that ranks relevance, and a function that returns the top matches. This is the core logic underlying both Retrieval Only mode and RAG mode.


Open docubot.py and locate three methods that currently contain TODOs: build_index, score_document, retrieve.


Read the docstrings carefully. Together, these functions define DocuBot's entire retrieval pipeline.


Before writing any code, decide how you want this system to work. Use Copilot to help you reason about the design:

Are you trying to understand what the functions should do?
Are you trying to plan an approach?
Or are you ready to edit code?
Strong engineers separate design from implementation. Copilot is most useful here when it helps you think through tradeoffs before writing code.

Implement simple versions of all three methods. A good first version of these uses basic Python, produces a numeric relevance score, and returns different results for different queries.

If Copilot suggest something you don't fully understand, pause. Ask it why it chose that approach, or simplify it until you can reason about every line.

Run DocuBot in Retrieval Only mode:

python main.py
Choose Mode 2.


Try asking questions that appear in the docs, such as:

"Where is the auth token generated?"
"Which endpoint returns all users?"

If results are confusing or incorrect, use Copilot on specific lines or functions to reason about the behavior and make targeted edits. Re-run the program after each meaningful change.

📍 Checkpoint: DocuBot now has a working retrieval system. You've used Copilot to plan, implement, critique, and refine core logic, while keeping yourself responsible for correctness and behavior.
Part 3: Improving Precision and Adding Safety
⏰ ~10 mins

Your retrieval system works, but it is still rough. Right now, DocuBot often retrieves more text than necessary and may attempt to answer questions even when the documentation does not support an answer.

In this phase, you will:

Refine retrieval to return smaller, more precise snippets
Add guardrails so DocuBot knows when not to answer
Use GitHub Copilot to refactor and reason about safety decisions

Run DocuBot in Retrieval Only mode (Mode 2) and ask a few questions again. Notice when large chunks of irrelevant text are returned, important details are buried, the system tries to answer questions it shouldn't.


Open docubot.py and identify where your retrieval logic decides what text gets returned. Before changing anything, pause and reason about the problem:

Is the issue happening before scoring, during scoring, or after sorting?
Is the unit of retrieval too large?
Use Copilot to help analyze the existing code. Strong use of AI here means asking "why does this behave this way?" before asking "how do I change it?"

Refactor your retrieval logic so DocuBot can identify smaller sections of text. You choose the strategy:

paragraphs
newline-separated sections
fixed-size slices
any simple, consistent rule
Use Copilot to explore options and refine your approach. When collaborating with the AI:

Describe how you currently return whole documents
Explain how you want to extract smaller pieces
Ask it to suggest simple Python-only approaches
Select or adapt an approach that feels clear and maintainable

Next, add a guardrail so DocuBot refuses to answer when it lacks meaningful evidence. Think carefully about what "no useful context" means in your system, where the decision to refuse should happen, and how to keep the logic explicit and readable. Use Copilot to reason about edge cases or refactor conditionals, but make the final call yourself.

Refusal is a feature. A clear "I don't know" response is safer than a confident guess.

Run DocuBot again in Retrieval Only mode and test a question clearly answered by the docs and a vague or unrelated question. Verify that relevant answers are more focused, and irrelevant questions trigger your guardrail.


If behavior is surprising, inspect the logic manually and use Copilot on specific blocks to explain or simplify. Rerun after each meaningful change.

📍 Checkpoint: DocuBot now retrieves more precise snippets and refuses to answer when it lacks evidence. You've used Copilot to analyze, refactor, and improve reliability, while keeping yourself responsible for correctness and safety.
Part 4: Comparing Retrieval, Generation, and RAG
⏰ ~10 mins

Now that DocuBot can retrieve precise snippets and safely refuse to answer, it's time for the final step: combining retrieval with generation. This is the heart of a RAG system. In this phase, you'll compare three versions of DocuBot side by side:

Naive LLM Mode — the model tries to answer using the entire docs corpus
Retrieval Only — no model, just your search logic
RAG Mode — retrieve first, then generate using only those snippets
Seeing these differences in action will help you understand why retrieval matters for grounding model outputs and reducing hallucinations.


Open main.py and look at how the three modes are routed. You've already used Mode 1 and Mode 2 earlier. Mode 3 uses:

your retrieval logic
plus the LLM through the GeminiClient
plus strict rules that tell the model to use only the retrieved snippets
Improvements in RAG usually come from better system design, not a "smarter" model.

Run DocuBot and test the same questions across all three modes. Keep the wording identical so your comparisons are meaningful. As you test, pay attention to what evidence each mode uses, what assumptions it makes, and when it should refuse to answer.


Use Copilot selectively to help analyze differences. For example:

Explaining why two outputs differ
Identifying which snippets were actually used
Spotting unsupported claims

Identify at least one example where:

Naive generation sounds confident but is weakly grounded
Retrieval only is accurate but hard to interpret
RAG balances clarity and evidence more effectively
Cases where RAG still fails

Document your observations in model_card.md.

📍 Checkpoint: You have now experimented with all three versions of DocuBot and seen how retrieval and generation complement each other. You should have a clear sense of when an LLM needs retrieval to stay grounded and when retrieval alone is not enough.