Tinker: ByteBits
ℹ️ Activity Overview

⏰ ~45 minutes

You have joined the development team of ByteBites, a new campus food ordering app that wants to feel fast, personalized, and a little bit smart. The problem is that the current prototype is a mess. The menu structure is inconsistent, orders are unreliable, and the so-called AI recommendations suggest soup as a dessert pairing. No one knows how the system is supposed to fit together.

Your task is to design and build the core architecture of the app using Python classes and simple algorithms. You'll use AI as a design partner, but you must verify and refine everything it produces. By the end, you'll have created a clean and functional version of the system that makes sense to a human engineer.

You'll practice reading vague design requests, turning them into clear system components, generating UML-style diagrams with AI, translating those diagrams into code, and testing your work with small examples. You'll also learn how to guide an AI tool into producing helpful scaffolds rather than over-engineered solutions.

🎯 Goals

By completing this activity, you will be able to...

    Use object-oriented design to break a feature request into core components.
    Represent and manipulate structured data using simple Python classes and containers.
    Apply algorithmic reasoning to tasks such as sorting, filtering, and validation.
    Use UML-style diagrams to think about system structure before writing code.
    Incorporate AI-produced code and diagrams as inputs to your workflow.

✏️ Tinker Instructions
Part 1: System Design (UML and AI Collaboration)

⏰ ~10 mins

You have received a raw feature request from the ByteBites product manager. Your task is to translate that request into a clear system architecture: create a workspace, prepare your AI tooling, identify the four core components (classes), and use AI (with project context) to draft a UML-style class diagram. You'll evaluate and refine the diagram until it matches exactly what the request describes.

1a. Set Up Your Working Environment

Before you begin designing, set up your working environment.

    Create a new folder on your computer named bytebites_tinker_activity.

    Open VS Code and choose File → Open Folder…, then select the new folder.

    Open the terminal and initialize a Git repository:

    git init

    Create your first commit so VS Code recognizes this as an active Git workspace:

    git add .
    git commit -m "initial commit"

1b. Create the Spec File

    In the project root, create a Markdown file named bytebites_spec.md.

    Copy the Client Feature Request (below) into the file.

    Add a heading "Candidate Classes" and list the four nouns you believe the system must model. Use your own judgment here; the goal is to identify the core data objects the system needs.
    Client Feature Request

    We need to build the backend logic for the ByteBites app. The system needs to manage our customers, tracking their names and their past purchase history so the system can verify they are real users.

    These customers need to browse specific food items (like a "Spicy Burger" or "Large Soda"), so we must track the name, price, category, and popularity rating for every item we sell.

    We also need a way to manage the full collection of items — a digital list that holds all items and lets us filter by category such as "Drinks" or "Desserts".

    Finally, when a user picks items, we need to group them into a single transaction. This transaction object should store the selected items and compute the total cost.

1c. Draft a UML Diagram Using Copilot Chat

    Open Copilot Chat in VS Code.

    Attach or reference bytebites_spec.md as context.

    Choose a Copilot mode (Ask, Edit, or Plan) and explore how it interprets your spec.

    Craft a prompt that asks Copilot to generate a UML-style class diagram for your four classes. Think about what information the model needs and how to phrase your request clearly.
    If you're unsure how to start, focus on describing the system, not on formatting on syntax. You can explain what the system does and what classes you identified, then ask Copilot to visualize or organize that information. If the output is confusing, ask follow-up questions or request a simpler version.

    Review the diagram you receive.
        Does it add classes not in your candidate list?
        Does it miss important attributes?
        Does anything look inconsistent with the feature request?
    A useful diagram should help you understand the system. Ask yourself:
        Can you explain what each class represents in one sentence?
        Do the attributes match what the feature request describes?
        If a class or relationship surprises you, that is a signal to question it. 

    Save the output in a temporary file such as draft_from_copilot.md.

1d. Configure a Custom Agent for ByteBites

    In VS Code, open the Command Palette (Ctrl+Shift+P / ⌘⇧P) and choose Chat: New Custom Agent.
    The custom agent is a way to give Copilot consistent guidance so it behaves more predictably. Instead of repeating the same constraints in every chat message, you encode them once. Think of it as setting "house rules" for how AI suggestions should be shaped in this project.

    Save the agent file under .github/agens/bytebites_design_agent.md.

    Add metadata such as:
        name: ByteBites Design Agent
        description: A focused agent for generating and refining ByteBites UML diagrams and scaffolds.
        tools: ["read", "edit"]

    In the body of the agent definition file, write a short set of instructions guiding how it should behave. For example, you may want it to stay within the set of classes you provide, avoid unnecessary complexity, or follow a particular diagram format.

    Save and commit the agent definition. After that, this agent will appear in Copilot Chat dropdown.

1e. Use the Custom Agent to Draft and Refine Your UML Diagram

    Open the Copilot Chat and select ByteBites Design Agent from the dropdown.

    Attach bytebites_spec.md again so the agent has context.

    Ask the agent to produce a revised UML diagram for your four classes.

    Compare the new diagram to the earlier draft. Notice how the behavior differs from the standard Copilot modes.

    Iterate with follow-up messages of your design until the diagram matches the feature request accurately.

    Save the final version as bytebites_design.md.

    Commit it:

    git add bytebites_design.md
    git commit -m "Add final UML design diagram"

📍Checkpoint: You now have two diagrams to compare: one from standard Copilot modes and one from your custom agent. Reflect on how the outputs differed and why the custom agent produced a design closer to the specification. Your final saved diagram should reflect your verified interpretation of the ByteBites feature request.

Part 2: Code Implementation

⏰ ~10 mins

In this section you'll turn your UML diagram into Python class scaffolds. You'll use Copilot Chat to plan and draft your code, then review and refine it yourself with help from your custom ByteBites design agent. Your goal is to practice a full AI-assisted workflow where you define intent, generate structured code, and evaluate the output carefully.

2a. Create the Implementation File

    In your project folder, create a file named models.py in your project.

    Add brief comments at the top summarizing the four classes you designed.

    Commit the file.

    git add models.py
    git commit -m "Add empty models.py with class list"

2b. Use Copilot Chat to Plan Your Class Structure

    Open Copilot Chat and switch to Plan Mode.
    Plan mode works best when you describe intent, not syntax. Focus on what each class represents and what information it should store. If the plan feels too detailed or introduces features you didn't design, you can ignore or revise it. The plan is a suggestion, not a requirement.

    Attach your spec file and UML diagram.

    Ask Copilot for a high-level plan for implementing your four classes.

    Review the plan and adjust it so that it matches your diagram and the ByteBites spec.

2c. Draft Class Scaffolds with Copilot Chat

    Begin adding empty class definitions in models.py (for example: class Customer:).

    For each class, decide what context to give Copilot, then use Ask Mode or Edit Mode to request a draft scaffold.
    At this stage, a scaffold is just the basic shape of a class. It usually includes the class name, a constructor, and attributes that store data. You're not expected to implement real logic yet. If your class feels "empty but structured," you're on the right track.

    Examine the generated code carefully.
        Remove anything that does not appear in your UML diagram.
        Add anything Copilot missed.
        Make sure the structure reflects your own design choices.

2d. Refine Using Your Custom ByteBites Agent

    When your scaffolds are in place, switch to your custom agent in Copilot Chat.
    Ask it to review one class at a time and propose refinements that keep the implementation aligned with the ByteBites spec.

2e. Run a Quick Manual Check

    Create a few sample objects in a temporary script.

    Print or inspect them to confirm that attributes are sorted correctly. Make any adjustments you discover during this testing.
    You're not writing formal tests yet. You're just creating a few objects and checking that Python runs without errors and stores the data you expect. If you can create objects and print their attributes successfully, your scaffolds are working.

    Save and commit your completed scaffolds:

    git add models.py
    git commit -m "Add initial scaffolds for ByteBites classes"

📍Checkpoint: You now have four class scaffolds that reflect your UML diagram. You used Copilot Chat to plan and draft the structure, refined the results, and confirmed that your classes behave as expected.

Part 3: Algorithmic Enhancements

⏰ ~10 mins

In this section you'll implement the core algorithms that make your ByteBites system functional. You'll use Copilot Chat to help plan and draft the logic, then evaluate and refine the results yourself. Your custom ByteBites design agent can help review methods once you have working drafts. The goal is to practice using AI as a collaborator while keeping full responsibility for correctness.

3a. Plan Your Algorithmic Work

    Open Copilot Chat and switch to Plan Mode.
    Plan mode is meant to help you think ahead before writing code. A good plan names the methods you need and describes what each one should do in plain language. If the plan includes code or details you do not recognize, treat it as optional guidance, not a requirement.

    Attach your spec file and UML diagram.

    Ask Copilot to outline the methods your system needs for filtering, sorting, and computing totals.
    If you feel unsure what methods to implement, revisit your UML diagram and spec file. The plan should reflect decisions you already made, not invent new responsibilities for your classes.

    Review and adjust the plan so that it matches the design you created. Treat this plan as a guide rather than a set of instructions.

3b. Draft Each Method with Copilot Chat

    For each method (filtering, sorting, total calculation), start by writing a simple method signature and a brief comment about the intended behavior.

    Highlight your method or the surrounding context, then use Ask Mode or Edit Mode in Copilot Chat to request a first draft of the implementation.
    Ask mode is useful when you want ideas or a first draft from scratch. Edit mode is useful when you already have a method stub or partial logic and want help improving or completing it. If one mode gives confusing output, try the other.

    Review the generated code carefully.
        Does it follow your UML design?
        Does it use the attributes your classes actually have?
        Does it avoid adding unnecessary features?

    Modify the code until it behaves correctly.

3c. Refine Methods with Your Custom Agent

    When your method works, highlight the method and switch to your custom ByteBites agent.
    Ask the agent to review the method for clarity, correctness, or structure. Use your judgment to decide whether to adopt the suggestions. Only keep refinements that improve the method without introducing inconsistencies.

3d. Test Your Methods Manually

    At the bottom of models.py or in a temporary script, create a small scenario that exercises your new methods. Include adding items, sorting menus, filtering categories, and computing an order total.

    Run the code to verify that each method behaves as intended.

    Make corrections as needed.

    Save and commit your updated code:

    git add models.py
    git commit -m "Implement algorithmic methods with AI-assisted workflow"

📍Checkpoint: You planned your work with Copilot Chat, drafted each method using Ask or Edit mode, verified correctness yourself, and used your custom agent for refinement. Your ByteBites system now has fully functioning filtering, sorting, and total calculation logic created through a structured AI-assisted workflow.

Part 4: Testing and Validation

⏰ 10 mins

In this section you'll write tests by first describing what the test should do in comments, then using one of Copilot's modes to turn those comments into pytest code. After you review and correct the draft, you'll use your custom ByteBites design agent to refine it further so the final test matches the system specification.

4a. Set Up Your Test File

    Create a new file named test_bytebites.py in your project.

    Import the classes you need from models.py.

    Commit the empty file:

    git add test_bytebites.py
    git commit -m "Create test file"

4b. Use Copilot Chat to Explore Test Ideas

    Open Copilot Chat and switch to a mode you think will help you start (Ask, Edit, or Plan).

    Describe the behaviors you want to test, such as category filtering, sorting, and total calculation.

    Use Copilot's suggestions to inspire or structure your test functions. You may choose to generate a full test draft or simply gather ideas.
    When thinking about tests, describe what the system should do from the outside. Avoid testing internal details like how a loop is written. If you can explain the behavior in one sentence, it is usually a good test candidate.

    A robust test suite doesn't just check if the code works; it checks where it might break.
        Logic Tests (The "Happy Path"): Focus on the core functionality. If a user adds a $10 burger and a $5 soda, does the total equal $15?
            Template: test_calculate_total_with_multiple_items
        Edge Cases (The "What If?"): Focus on boundaries and empty states. What happens if a user opens a transaction but adds nothing? Does the system return $0 or crash?
            Template: test_order_total_is_zero_when_empty

    Quick Checklist for a "Good" Test:
        One Sentence: If you can't describe the test's goal in one sentence (e.g., "Verify that filtering 'Drinks' only returns liquid items"), it's too complex.
        Isolation: Avoid testing how the code is written (loops/if-statements); focus on the output it produces. 

4c. Draft Your Tests

    Write test functions in test_bytebites.py that cover the key behaviors of your system. Include at least:
        a test for order totals,
        a test for empty totals, and
        a test for filtering menu items by category.

    If you want help drafting or refining a specific test, highlight it and use Copilot Chat in Ask or Edit mode.
    It is okay if you are unfamiliar with pytest. Many engineers use AI tools to draft test structure and syntax, then learn by reading and modifying the result. Focus on whether the test checks the right behavior.

4d. Refine Tests with Your Custom Agent

    When you have test drafts that run, highlight one test at a time and switch to your custom ByteBites agent.
    Ask the agent to review the test for clarity, correctness, or consistency with the specification.
    Apply only the refinements that improve the test and match your own understanding of the system.

4e. Run and Debug Your Test Suite

    Use python -m pytest in the terminal to run your tests.

    Review any failures and decide whether the test or your implementation needs adjustment. Use Copilot Chat if you want help diagnosing issues, but make final decisions yourself.
    When a test fails, read the error message from top to bottom. Look for:
        which test failed,
        what value was expected,
        what value was actually returned.

    You can paste the error message into Copilot Chat and ask for help interpreting it, but you should decide what to change.

    Continue refining until all tests pass.

    Commit your final test suites:

    git add test_bytebites.py
    git commit -m "Add validated tests for ByteBites"

📍Checkpoint: You now have a working test suite created through a mix of your own reasoning and AI-assisted drafting. You explored several Copilot Chat modes, refined individual tests with your custom agent, and verified correctness through automated execution. Your ByteBites system is fully implemented and tested. 